[draft] feat(flutter): improve upload debug symbols (#12356)
getsentry/sentry-docs: docs/platforms/flutter/upload-debug.mdx

Errors raised from the native layer in Flutter apps require certain debug information files to be uploaded. For example, an Android app can use `proguard` for minification and obfuscation. And when using NDK, dwarf debug files need to be uploaded. Flutter Web requires sourcemaps and iOS apps also require dwarf debug information files.

## Sentry Dart Plugin

> The easiest way to upload debug symbols, source maps and use source context is to use the [Sentry Dart Plugin](https://github.com/getsentry/sentry-dart-plugin) which will upload them automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The easiest way to upload debug symbols, source maps, and use source context is to use the [Sentry Dart Plugin](https://github.com/getsentry/sentry-dart-plugin) which will upload them automatically.
```

Add the following to your `pubspec.yaml` file:

```yaml {filename: pubspec.yaml}
sentry:
  project: ___PROJECT_SLUG___
  org: ___ORG_SLUG___
  auth_token: ___ORG_AUTH_TOKEN___
```

<Note>

The option `upload_debug_symbols` is enabled by default. That means the plugin will automatically upload debug symbols for all platforms except Flutter Web.

</Note>

#### Source Maps

By default, source maps are not uploaded. In order to upload source maps, you need to set the `upload_source_maps` field to `true`.

```yaml {filename: pubspec.yaml} {5}
sentry:
  project: ___PROJECT_SLUG___
  org: ___ORG_SLUG___
  auth_token: ___ORG_AUTH_TOKEN___
  upload_source_maps: true
```

#### Source Context

By default, sources are not uploaded. In order to upload sources, you need to set the `upload_sources` field to `true`.

```yaml {filename: pubspec.yaml} {5}
sentry:
  project: ___PROJECT_SLUG___
  org: ___ORG_SLUG___
  auth_token: ___ORG_AUTH_TOKEN___
  upload_sources: true

```

<Note>

This uploads the source files of the Dart/Flutter code, not the native code.
If you want to use source context for native code, you need to setup source context in the respective native platform.

</Note>

> In addition to configuring the plugin in the `pubspec.yaml` file the plugin supports using a properties file or environment variables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to configuring the plugin in the `pubspec.yaml` file, the plugin supports using a properties file or environment variables.
```

For more information, read the [Sentry Dart Plugin README](https://github.com/getsentry/sentry-dart-plugin/tree/main?tab=readme-ov-file#configuration-optional).

### 3. Build

Run one of the following commands before executing the `sentry_dart_plugin` plugin.
If you choose to obfuscate your build, include the `--obfuscate` flag along with the `--split-debug-info` option to specify the directory for storing debug information.

For a standard build:
- `flutter build apk`
- `flutter build ios`
- `flutter build macos`
- `flutter build web`

For an obfuscated build:
- `flutter build apk --obfuscate --split-debug-info=<output-directory>`
- `flutter build ios --obfuscate --split-debug-info=<output-directory>`
- `flutter build macos --obfuscate --split-debug-info=<output-directory>`
- `flutter build web --obfuscate --split-debug-info=<output-directory>`

### 4. Run

> Now we can run the plugin to upload the debug symbols, source maps and sources (if enabled).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we can run the plugin to upload the debug symbols, source maps, and sources (if enabled).
```

```bash
flutter packages pub run sentry_dart_plugin
```

<Note>

If you choose not to obfuscate your build, the plugin will not upload debug symbols but will still configure source context if enabled.

</Note>

### Proguard

If you have ProGuard (`minifyEnabled`) enabled, you must upload the [Android Proguard/R8 mapping files](/platforms/android/enhance-errors/proguard) to see complete stack traces.

In order to upload debug symbols for ProGuard obfuscated native Android code you have two options:
1. Use the [Sentry Android Gradle Plugin](/platforms/android/configuration/gradle/)
2. Use the [Sentry CLI](/cli/dif/#uploading-files)

> The Sentry Android Gradle Plugin is the easier and recommended way to upload debug symbols for Android.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Sentry Android Gradle Plugin is the simpler and recommended way to upload debug symbols for Android.
```

After installing the Sentry Android Gradle Plugin, you need to set `autoInstallation` to `false` in your `app/build.gradle` file:

```groovy {filename: app/build.gradle}
sentry {
    autoInstallation {
      enabled = false
    }
}
```

Sentry Flutter already ships with a compatible Sentry Android SDK, so we need to disable the auto-installation which could cause conflicts with the packaged Sentry Android SDK.

> After setting up the gradle plugin follow the [Android Gradle Plugin guide](/platforms/android/configuration/gradle/#proguardr8--dexguard) on how to upload Proguard mapping files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After setting up the gradle plugin, follow the [Android Gradle Plugin guide](/platforms/android/configuration/gradle/#proguardr8--dexguard) on how to upload Proguard mapping files.
```

## Manually Upload Debug Symbols

If you have an obfuscated build and you decide not to use the Sentry Dart Plugin, you can manually upload debug symbols for Android, iOS/macOS, Flutter Web.

You will need to upload the following files:
- [dSYM files](/platforms/android/data-management/debug-files/file-formats/#mach-o-and-dsym) (`*.dSYM`) for iOS and macOS
- [Flutter generated symbols](https://docs.flutter.dev/deployment/obfuscate#obfuscate-your-app) (`*.symbols`) for Android and [ELF](/platforms/android/data-management/debug-files/file-formats/#executable-and-linkable-format-elf) for Android NDK
- Source Maps (`*.map`) for Web

### iOS and macOS

Sentry requires a dSYM upload to symbolicate your crash logs. The symbolication process unscrambles Apple’s crash logs to reveal the function, file names, and line numbers of the crash. [Learn how to upload the dSYM files](/platforms/apple/dsym/).

### Android

See our docs on uploading [Debug Information Files](/cli/dif/#uploading-files) manually with the Sentry CLI.

### Android NDK

See our docs on uploading [Debug Information Files](/cli/dif/#uploading-files) manually with the Sentry CLI.

> If you are using a version of `sentry_flutter` earlier than 5.1, native symbolication on Android requires a specific configuration. Refer to [Troubleshooting](/platforms/flutter/troubleshooting/#native-symbolication-on-android) for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're using a version of `sentry_flutter` earlier than 5.1, native symbolication on Android requires a specific configuration. Refer to [Troubleshooting](/platforms/flutter/troubleshooting/#native-symbolication-on-android) for more information.
```

<Note>

Sentry's Flutter SDK doesn't currently support the `uploadNativeSymbols` flag from the [Sentry Gradle Plugin](/platforms/android/configuration/gradle/).

</Note>

### Web

> See our docs on uploading [Source Maps](cli/releases/#upload-source-maps) manually.

Reviewer: This link 404s, is this the correct url?

https://sentry-docs-git-feat-update-debug-symbols-android.sentry.dev/platforms/flutter/upload-debug/cli/releases/#upload-source-maps

Author: updated the url
